Vvenkatesan/doxygen (#32)
ai-dynamo/nixl: docs/doxygen/nixl_doxygen.md

\image html doxygen/nixl.png "Figure of NIXL high level architecture" width=500px
\image latex doxygen/nixl.png "Figure of NIXL high level architecture" width=500px

NIXL operates under the assumption that it is managed by a conductor process responsible for orchestrating the inference process. This includes tasks such as handling user request data and exchanging the necessary serialized metadata.

# Design
NIXL's Transfer Agent abstracts away three key categories of information:

1. [Memory Section](#memory-sections): Unifies various types of memory and storage, allowing the agent to accept a buffer list primitive for transactions regardless of the memory type.
2. [Transfer Backend Interface](#transfer-backend-interface): Abstracts different transfer backends from the agent, facilitating transfers between various memory and storage device types.
3. [Metadata Handler](#metadata-handler): Provides a serialized form of necessary information for each agent, enabling communication between agents. It also caches required remote agent information for the local agent.

> Using these components, the NIXL Transfer Agent provides a desired interface by receiving a buffer list primitive from the distributed inference platform and returning an asynchronous handle to check the status. The agent supports multiple backends, allowing seamless data movement via [RoCE](https://docs.nvidia.com/networking/display/ofedv502180/rdma+over+converged+ethernet+(roce)), [Infiniband](https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/networking/products/infiniband/), [GPUDirect RDMA](https://developer.nvidia.com/gpudirect), NVMe-oF, TCP, and potentially file system emulation. NIXL determines the optimal transfer backend based on the memory types used in a transfer. For example, if the source is DRAM and the target is VRAM, UCX might be used. If the transfer involves VRAM as the source and PFS as the backend, GPUDirect Storage APIs could be employed. In cases where multiple backends support the memory types, NIXL internally decides which one to use.

Author: Sure we can add that..

### Transfer Backend Interface
During initialization, each transfer backend must be registered with the transfer agent. This registration process enables the transfer agent to gather sufficient information to determine the most suitable backend for a transfer based on memory section descriptors. It is possible for the same memory location to be registered with multiple backends, and the NIXL agent will select the optimal one based on the source and destination memory types, as well as the available backends on the remote node.

### Metadata Handler
The Metadata Handler manages the metadata necessary for establishing transfers between the initiating transfer agent and the target agent. This metadata can be exchanged via a side channel or through a centralized metadata server like etcd or Redis. The serialized metadata includes connection information for each backend and remote identifiers for different registered memories and regions within the memory section. However, it excludes local private information stored in the memory section per backend, only including the remote identifiers needed for the target agent's backend to connect and initiate transfers.

> When loading metadata, the backend type that generated the remote identifiers is specified. This ensures that the received metadata is routed to the appropriate backend on the receiving agent. If that backend is not available, the relevant metadata portion is ignored.

Author: I think this is an improvement we added. This was added from the HLD I assume. I will check and update.

> For example, a memory section tagged with UCX indicates it was generated by a UCX backend engine and should be delivered to a UCX backend engine on the receiving agent, if present.

Author: As long as its correct, its ok not to remove it then

# Example procedure
The following image shows a basic example of how to use NIXL between 2 nodes. The API usage is further reviewed in three parts: initialization, transfer, and dynamicity.

\image html doxygen/nixl_two_nodes.png "Example of NIXL with two nodes" width=500px
\image latex doxygen/nixl_two_nodes.png "Example of NIXL with two nodes" width=500px

## Initialization
For each node in the system, runtime creates an agent, and if necessary gives the list of devices to it (not shown in the above example). Then for each transfer_backend that is supported for the system, it calls the create_transfer_backend API. Next, the memories regions that are going to be used are registered with each relevant backend. For instance, in the above example we register all GPU HBM memories with UCX.

```
# list of devices (GPUs, DRAM, NICs, NVMe, etc)

> create_agent(name, optional_devices)

Author: Yes I think this was added at a conceptual level. it is expected that those devices are configured ahead of time.

# User allocates memory from their preferred devices -> alloced_mem
foreach transfer_backend:
    create_transfer_backend(corresponding_backend_init)
    foreach alloced_mem: # If they are relevant for that backend
        register_memory (desc, backend)
```

## Metadata Exchange
Once backends and memory regions are registered with NIXL, the runtime requests the metadata for each agent, either directly or by sending it to a central metadata server. This metadata is necessary for initiator agents to connect to target agents and facilitate data transfers between them. In the example provided, metadata is exchanged directly without a metadata server. However, agent A's metadata can also be sent to agent B if B needs to initiate a transfer to A.

> Following the metadata exchange, which includes connection information for each registered backend, the runtime can proactively call the make_connection API using the target agent's name if the agents involved in the transfer are known in advance. Otherwise, the connection is established during the first transfer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following the metadata exchange, which includes connection information for each registered backend, the runtime can proactively call the makeConnection API using the target agent's name if the agents involved in the transfer are known in advance. Otherwise, the connection is established during the first transfer. This functionality is optional and up to the backend to specify what can happen during this stage.
```

### Side channel
```
# In each agent:
get_local_metadata()

# Exchange the metadata to the desired agents

# In each agent:
    for each received metadata:
        remote_agent_name = load_remote_metadata()
        make_connection(remote_agent_name) # optional

```

### Central metadata
```
# In each agent:
    send_local_metadata()

for each target_agent:
    fetch_remote_metadata(target_agent_name)
    make_connection(remote_agent_name) # optional
```

## Transfer

> To initiate a transfer, both the initiator and target agents need to provide a descriptor (buffer) list, which can be sent by the runtime from the target to the initiator agent. Using these descriptor lists, along with the target agent's name and the transfer operation (read or write), a transfer can be created, returning a transfer handle. Optionally, a notification message can be specified for the operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To initiate a transfer, both the initiator must provide a list of local buffer descriptions and a list of remotely registered buffers. The remotely registered buffers can be be communicated out of band, but are naturally baked-into the metadata when a target calls getLocalMD and provides it for loadRemoteMD. Using these descriptor lists, along with the target agent's name and the transfer operation (read or write), a transfer handle can be created that can be provided to postXfer to start the transfer. Optionally, a notification message can be specified for the operation at handle creation time or post time. 
```

> The create_transfer_request function performs the necessary checks for the transfer and determines which backend will be used. If successful, the runtime can subsequently post a transfer request described by the received handle one or more times (but only single instance of a transfer is allowed at any given point in time). The status of the transfer can be checked using the get_transfer_status function. In the example provided, the process blocks on the transfer checks since it is the only transfer in the system and there is no computation to overlap it with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The createXferRequest function performs the necessary checks for the transfer and determines which backend will be used, unless a backend is specifically requested. If successful, the runtime can subsequently post a transfer request described by the received handle one or more times (but only single instance of a transfer is allowed at any given point in time). The status of the transfer can be checked using the getXferStatus function. In the example provided, the process blocks on the transfer checks since it is the only transfer in the system and there is no computation to overlap it with.
```

```
# On initiator agent
hdl = create_transfer_request(local_descs, target_descs,
	        		      target_agent_name, notif_msg,
                              operation (RD/WR))

# Example of reposting the same transfer request
for n iterations:
    post_transfer_request(hdl)
    while (get_transfer_status(hdl) != complete):
        # do other tasks, non-blocking

```

> ## Dynamic scaling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Adding/removing agents
```

Adding a new agent to a service involves creating the agent and exchanging its metadata with the existing agents in the service. To remove an agent or handle a failure, you can use one of the metadata invalidate APIs. This triggers disconnections for backends connected to the agent and purges the cached metadata values.

> ### Side channel
> 
> ```
> # In each agent (the connected ones or all, both options are fine)
> invalidate_remote_agent(remote_agent_name)
> 
> # In case of failure, the heartbeat system sends this message
> # to connected or all agents through the side channel control
> ```
> 
> ### Central metadata
> 
> ```
> # In the agent that is going to be removed
> Invalidate local agent metadata()
> 
> # In case of failure, the heartbeat system sends this message
> # to the central metadata server
> ```
> 
> ## Teardown

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Author: Why are we remving this?

Reviewer: These sections are either not helpful or not relevant. The bits of pseudo-code don't add anything,  ee don't have a heartbeat system, we don't really have side channel control, we don't really have a central cache manager

Similar to removing an agent, invalidating an agent's metadata is necessary through one of the two APIs. When an agent is destroyed (via its destructor), it deregisters all registered memory regions with the backends, calls destructors of each backend which invalidate their internal transfer states, and releases other internal resources in the agent.

> ### Side channel
> 
> ```
> # In each agent (the connected ones or all, both options are fine)
> invalidate_remote_agent(remote_agent_name)
> 
> # In the agent that is going to be deleted
> delete agent
> ```
> 
> ### Central metadata
> 
> ```
> # In the agent that is going to be removed
> Invalidate local agent metadata()
> detete agent
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->
# NVIDIA Inference Xfer Library (NIXL)
NIXL is targeted for accelerating point to point communications in AI inference frameworks such as [Dynamo](https://github.com/ai-dynamo/dynamo), while providing an abstraction over various types of memory (e.g., CPU and GPU) and storage (e.g., file, block and object store) through a modular plug-in architecture.

# Background
Distributed inference workloads present complex challenges for systems, including but not limited to networking and communication issues. These challenges encompass high-performance requirements, heterogeneous data paths that span both memory and storage, and the need for dynamic scaling up and down.

> NIXL is designed to support inference frameworks by addressing their challenges while delivering high-bandwidth, low-latency point-to-point data transfers. It offers a unified abstraction across various memory types, including HBM, DRAM, local or remote SSDs, and distributed storage systems, through a versatile API. This API can support multiple backend plugins like UCX, GDS, SCADA, S3, and other protocols or clients. Furthermore, NIXL abstracts away additional backend specifics, such as connection management, addressing schemes, and memory characteristics, to streamline integration with inference frameworks.

Reviewer 2: Vikram removed it from the dynamo doc, so we can remove it here too. Not sure why, but anyways no point if that's not in our current plans.

# Overview

The following figure illustrates NIXL's relationship to inference server stacks. NIXL functions as a standalone library, providing the necessary abstraction for various network and storage backends to support the dataplane operations of distributed inference platforms, such as Dynamo. The backends that were considered in NIXL's design include, but are not limited to, [UCX](https://github.com/openucx/ucx), [NVIDIA Magnum IO GPUDirect Storage](https://docs.nvidia.com/gpudirect-storage/overview-guide/index.html), file systems (including DFS), block and object storage. NIXL offers generic interfaces capable of supporting data transfers in the form of tensors, bytes, or objects.

\image html doxygen/nixl.png "Figure of NIXL high level architecture" width=500px
\image latex doxygen/nixl.png "Figure of NIXL high level architecture" width=500px

> NIXL operates under the assumption that it is managed by a conductor process responsible for orchestrating the inference process. This includes tasks such as handling user request data and exchanging the necessary serialized metadata.

Reviewer 2: handling user request data is confusing. Just handling user requests? or maybe memory allocation?
I'm wondering if we should change the second sentence, as we would add some support for ETCD, but not sure all the way. Maybe something like providing the means, such as ETCD metadata server, to exchange the necessary serialized metadata?

# Design
NIXL's Transfer Agent abstracts away three key entities:

1. [Memory Section](#memory-sections): Unifies various types of memory and storage, allowing the agent to accept a buffer list primitive for transactions regardless of the memory type.

> 2. [Transfer Backend Interface](#transfer-backend-interface): Abstracts different transfer backends from the agent, facilitating transfers between various memory and storage device types.

Reviewer 2: Abstracts different transfer backends from the agent, facilitating transfers between various memory and storage device types. -->
Abstracts different transfer backends from the agent, facilitating efficient transfers by selecting the most optimal backend.

Reviewer 2: it's confusing to bring memory in the second bullet, when first one was supposed to abstract it away.

> 3. [Metadata Handler](#metadata-handler): Encapsulates the information required to perform data transfers between memory and storage resources managed by NIXL agents.

Reviewer 2: Encapsulates the information required to perform data transfers between NIXL agents running on different workers (e.g., a DGX node or a single GPU).

> Using these components, the NIXL Transfer Agent provides a desired interface by receiving a buffer list primitive from the distributed inference platform and returning an asynchronous handle to check the status. The agent supports multiple backends, allowing seamless data movement via [RoCE](https://docs.nvidia.com/networking/display/ofedv502180/rdma+over+converged+ethernet+(roce)), [Infiniband](https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/networking/products/infiniband/), [GPUDirect RDMA](https://developer.nvidia.com/gpudirect), NVMe-oF, TCP, NVLink(https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/data-center/nvlink/) ,and potentially file system emulation. NIXL determines the optimal transfer backend based on the memory types used in a transfer. For example, if the source is DRAM and the target is VRAM, UCX might be used. If the transfer involves VRAM as the source and PFS as the backend, GPUDirect Storage APIs could be employed. In cases where multiple backends support the memory types, NIXL internally decides which one to use.

Reviewer 2: provides a desired --> provides the desired

Reviewer 2: ,and potentially --> , and potentially

Reviewer 2: NIXL determines the optimal transfer backend based on the memory types used in a transfer. -->
NIXL determines the optimal transfer backend based on the memory types used in a transfer, as well as available common backends between the two agents.

Reviewer 2: In cases where multiple backends support the memory types, NIXL internally decides which one to use. --> 
In cases where multiple backends can perform the transfer request, NIXL internally decides which one to use.

> NIXL agent is instantiated within inference processes managing one or more GPU devices. In the centralized inference implementations, NIXL agent is initialized as part of the inference service. In a distributed inference setup, the NIXL library is integrated into the main conductor process per node, where an agent can manage multiple devices. For instance, on a DGX server, a single agent in the main conductor process can access several GPUs and other memory or storage nodes. Each agent is identified by a unique and global ID/name assigned by the inference platform.

Reviewer 2: Incorrect second sentence ...

### Memory Sections

> A Memory Section is a mixture of address ranges (segments) registered with the agent. NIXL supports multiple segment types, including DRAM, VRAM, NVMe-oF, Object storage, and File. The Memory Section comprise the local information required by the transfer backend engines as well the required details for remote agents to access the corresponding segments.

Reviewer 2: remote identifiers

### Transfer Backend Interface
Each transfer backend must be initialized for the corresponding transfer agent. This process enables the transfer agent to keep track of the available transfer engines.
Using this information, the most suitable backend for a transfer can be determined based on segment descriptors. For example, it is possible for the same memory location to be registered with multiple backends. In this case, NIXL agent will select the optimal one based on the source and destination memory types, as well as the available backends on the remote node.

### Metadata Handler

> The Metadata Handler manages the data necessary for establishing data communication between the NIXL segments. This metadata can be exchanged via a side channel or through a centralized metadata server like "etcd" or Redis. The metadata includes connection information for each backend and remote segment identifiers. The metadata shared with remote NIXL agents excludes local information irrelevant on the remote side.

Reviewer 2: NIXL Agents.

Reviewer 2: minimal, considerate of security concerns. Maybe also mention secure side channel or so.

When loading metadata, the backend type that generated the remote identifiers is specified. This ensures that the received metadata is routed to the appropriate backend on the receiving agent. If that backend is not available, the relevant metadata portion is ignored.

For example, a memory section tagged with UCX indicates it was generated by a UCX backend engine and should be delivered to a UCX backend engine on the receiving agent, if present.

> In the optimal mode of operation, the metadata exchange occurs on the control path (not the data path). It is advised to register the majority of NIXL segments comprising the application footprint at application initialization time so the metadata is exchanged only once.

Reviewer 2: Let's remove the majority part, register all.

Reviewer 2: Further registration requires metadata exchange...

To support the dynamic nature of inference workloads, metadata caching is leveraged. This approach allows to:

* Avoid fetching the same metadata on each transaction

> * Dynamically add new agents by providing its metadata to the caching subsystem of the agents that communicate with it.

Reviewer 2: Not connecting, user can connect through another API.

> * Dynamically exclude an agent by invalidating the caches of the agent that previously interacted with it.

Reviewer 2: which will also disconnect from it.

Reviewer 2: If already connected.

# Example procedure
The following image shows a basic example of how to use NIXL between 2 nodes. The API usage is further reviewed in three parts: initialization, transfer, and dynamicity.

\image html doxygen/nixl_two_nodes.png "Example of NIXL with two nodes" width=500px
\image latex doxygen/nixl_two_nodes.png "Example of NIXL with two nodes" width=500px

## Initialization

> For each node in the system, the runtime creates an agent, and if necessary gives the list of devices to it (not shown in the above example). Then for each transfer_backend that is supported for the system, it calls the create_transfer_backend API. Next, the NIXL segments are created by each relevant backend. For instance, in the above example, we register all GPU HBM memory with UCX.

Reviewer 2: Then for each desired transfer backend

Reviewer 2: If no backend is specified, all relevant ones.

```
# list of devices (GPUs, DRAM, NICs, NVMe, etc)
create_agent(name, optional_devices)

# User allocates memory from their preferred devices -> alloced_mem
foreach transfer_backend:
    create_transfer_backend(corresponding_backend_init)
    foreach alloced_mem: # If they are relevant for that backend

>         register_memory (desc, backend)

Reviewer 2: Add the automatic mode, and make the desc to be desc_list.

```

## Metadata Exchange
Once backends and memory regions are registered with NIXL,
the runtime queries the metadata from each agent, either directly or by sending it to a central metadata server. This metadata is necessary for initiator agents to connect to target agents and facilitate data transfers between them. In the example provided, metadata is exchanged directly without a metadata server. However, agent A's metadata can also be sent to agent B if B needs to initiate a transfer to A.

> Following the metadata exchange, which includes connection information for each registered backend, the runtime can proactively call the makeConnection API using the target agent's name if the agents involved in the transfer are known in advance. Otherwise, the connection is established during the first transfer. This functionality is optional and up to the backend to specify what can happen during this stage.

Reviewer 2: If no backend specified, all the common ones.

### Side channel
```
# In each agent:
get_local_metadata()

# Exchange the metadata to the desired agents

# In each agent:
    for each received metadata:
        remote_agent_name = load_remote_metadata()
        make_connection(remote_agent_name) # optional

```

### Central metadata
```
# In each agent:
send_local_metadata()

for each target_agent:
    fetch_remote_metadata(target_agent_name)

>     make_connection(remote_agent_name) # optional

Reviewer 2: target_agent_name

```

## Transfer

> To initiate a transfer, both the initiator must provide a list of local buffer descriptions and a list of remotely registered buffers. The remotely registered buffers can be be communicated out of band, but are naturally baked-into the metadata when a target calls getLocalMD and provides it for loadRemoteMD. Using these descriptor lists, along with the target agent's name and the transfer operation (read or write), a transfer handle can be created. Optionally, a notification message can be specified for the operation at this time.

Reviewer 2: on the initiator it provides or something like that.

Reviewer 2: incorrect second sentence.

> The createXferRequest function performs the necessary checks for the transfer and determines which backend will be used, unless a backend is specifically requested. If successful, the runtime can subsequently post a transfer request described by the received handle one or more times (but only single instance of a transfer is allowed at any given point in time). The status of the transfer can be checked using the getXferStatus function. In the example provided, the process blocks on the transfer checks since it is the only transfer in the system and there is no computation to overlap it with.

Reviewer 2: of an specific transfer request, ...., to avoid data corruption

```
# On initiator agent
hdl = create_transfer_request(local_descs, target_descs,

> 	        		      target_agent_name, notif_msg,

Reviewer 2: spacing

Reviewer 2: but operation first.

                              operation (RD/WR))

# Example of reposting the same transfer request
for n iterations:
    post_transfer_request(hdl)
    while (get_transfer_status(hdl) != complete):
        # do other tasks, non-blocking

```

## Adding/removing agents
Adding a new agent to a service involves creating the agent and exchanging its metadata with the existing agents in the service. To remove an agent or handle a failure, you can use one of the metadata invalidate APIs. This triggers disconnections for backends connected to the agent and purges the cached metadata values.

### Side channel

```
# In each agent (the connected ones or all, both options are fine)
invalidate_remote_agent(remote_agent_name)

# In case of failure, the heartbeat system sends this message
# to connected or all agents through the side channel control
```

### Central metadata

```
# In the agent that is going to be removed
Invalidate local agent metadata()

# In case of failure, the heartbeat system sends this message
# to the central metadata server
```

## Teardown

> Similar to removing an agent, invalidating an agent's metadata is necessary through one of the two APIs. When an agent is destroyed (via its destructor), it deregisters all registered memory regions with the backends, calls destructors of each backend which invalidate their internal transfer states, and releases other internal resources in the agent.

Reviewer 2: all remaining registered memory regions (not deregistered by the user)
